#Introduction#

Welcome to this essay about my relationship to Xenofeminism and Glitch Feminism – Two manifestos which I had the pleasure reading during my time in university.
The Introduction will focus on my understanding of the two feminisms. In Overlap/Clash I will focus on the ideas that are similar and take a look at the differences between the two feminisms. I must specify that I do not wish to pit the people behind the ideas against each other. Pitting people against each other is an unfortunate and in my opinion dangerous practice of capitalism and fostered by our society and I refuse to take part in that. Therefore I will only focus on the ideas of the authors. Let’s begin.

XENOFEMINISM – A Politics for Alienation

The term Xenofeminism was coined by the group Laboria Cuboniks in 2014 by releasing a manifesto called “Xenofeminism – A Politics for Alienation” (Laboria Cuboniks 2014). Xenofeminism focuses on the possibilities of technology to transform current oppressive systems (Hester 2018: 6f). It also highlights that the alienation of everyone is an important tool to “the construction of freedom” (Laboria Cuboniks 2014: 0x01). Xenofeminism mainly uses three concepts to reach the goal of a more just future: Technomaterialism, Anti-Naturalism and Gender Abolitionism. Technomaterialism is the term to describe the use of technology as an activist tool to transform the future (Hester 2018: 7). Xenofeminism is also anti-naturalist. It states “that the glorification of ‘nature’ has nothing to offer us” (Laboria Cuboniks 2014: 0x01), because it is to often used as a justification of injustice or seen as a border to more equality that can’t be crossed (Hester 2018: 22). Xenofeminism wants to abolish all genders.  It has „the ambition to construct a society where traits currently assembled under the rubric of gender, no longer [...][hold] power” (Laboria Cuboniks 2014: 0x0E). Race and class are to be abolished as well so that there are no external factors that can be used for discrimination. 

GLITCH FEMINISM – A Manifesto

Glitch Feminism is a manifesto written by Legacy Russel in 2020. The manifesto acknowledges that the current society was not built to include and liberate everyone equally. Glitch Feminism focuses on the reinvention and liberation of marginalised people by being the Glitch.  Technology is being used as a metaphor for society. As the Glitch in this technology, you have the power to remix and malfunction the old system and create something new, something that is made to fit you. Glitch Feminism recognizes the power of technology like the internet as a place for “amplifying collectivity, coalition-building, and one’s courage to individuate“ (Russel 2020). Glitch Feminism states, that as a glitch, you can function better in a community, therefore there is an emphasis on the power of mobilisation: “In mobilizing, we find others
like us, and, in so doing, we find ourselves.” (Russel 2020).


Overlap/Clash


Technology

Both feminist manifestos agree in their core that technology is an essential tool for activism. Still, the focus of the two manifestos differs. Xenofeminism centers more around the use of technology to break the barriers of nature and the transformation of the current system, whereas Glitch Feminism embeds society  into the metaphor of the glitch with the glitch being the technological tool to change the system. 
In their slightly different uses of technology, the goal for their users is similar. Both want the users to be technologically literate to change the current systems: “XF seeks to strategically deploy existing technologies to re-engineer the world”  (Laboria cuboniks 2014: 0x02) while they “urge feminists to equip themselves with the skills to redeploy existing technologies and invent novel cognitive and material tools in the service of common ends.” (Laboria Cuboniks 2014: 0x07)”. At the same time, Glitch Feminism states that “to revolutionize technologies toward an application that truly celebrates glitched bodies, perhaps the only course of action is to remix from within[...]” (Russel 2020).
Technology is not only seen as a wonder, both feminisms also highlight the dangers that come with technology.  Xenofeminism recognizes that technology is “prone to imbalance, abuse, and exploitation of the weak” (Laboria Cuboniks 2014: 0x02) and  “that there are a range of gendered challenges specifically relating to life in a digital age —from sexual harassment via social media, to doxxing, privacy, and the protection of online images” (Laboria Cuboniks 2014: 0x07). Glitch feminism adds the dimension of data security to the discussion about the dangers of technology: “the loss of innocence that has come with the shift in understanding of how our digital traces might be manipulated, capitalized on, and deployed” (Russel 2020). But even if they recognize the dangers, both Xenofeminism and Glitch Feminism still want to use technology for the transformation of the society because of the potential. And the need, as technology is deeply intertwined with our daily lives. 

Abolition

Both feminisms want to change how categorisation, for example in gender, holds restrictions over everyone. While Xenofeminism focuses on the abolition of these restrictions that are placed upon gender (Hester 2018: 30), Glitch Feminism goes one step further and rejects the idea of a body altogether: “If to be recognized as a body that deserves to live we must perform a certain self —look a certain way, live a certain way, care for one another in a certain way—we strike against the body altogether” (Russel 2020). In Glitch feminism, there are no bodies, only glitches in the system that change it.
 
Alienation 

Xenofeminism and Glitch feminism agree that alienation is essential for freedom. Xenofeminism views alienation as the key to freedom:  “It is through, and not despite, our alienated condition that we can free ourselves” (Laboria Cuboniks 2014: 0x01), meaning that being alienated means to be free from the restrictions that society puts on everyone. At the same time, Glitch Feminism does not use the term alienation but describes how it manifests in society and how to respond to it: “We refuse the rhetoric of “inclusion” and will not wait for this world to love us, to understand us, to make space for us […]. We fail to function for a machine that was not built for us.“ (Russel 2020). So even though the manifesto does not specifically focus on the term alienation, the meaning is still included. 

We

One very important point is the focus of both feminism on the importance of fighting for each other. Glitch feminism wants “advocating for ourselves and advocating for one another”  and how “we openly, honestly consider together“ (Russel 2020). While Glitch Feminism seems to advocate from within the group and the same level as everyone among the group, Xenofeminism seems to write about groups and more from above them.  Instead of writing that “we” have to get better at understanding and using technology, Xenofeminism “urge[s] feminists to equip themselves” (Laboria Cuboniks 2014: 0x07). When talking about exploitation in capitalism, Xenofeminism explains to the reader how  „you’re not exploited or oppressed because you are a wage labourer or poor; you are a labourer or poor because you are exploited” (Laboria Cuboniks 2014 0x0E), instead of including themselves in the equation.


Personal

This class was the first time where I had the incentive to read feminist texts. It was so liberating for me to see all my brain fog about the unjust ways of society transformed into proper arguments. For the first time I felt really understood by a non-fiction text. Of course I don’t agree with everything in these manifestos. First of all, it bothers me that the writing style of these texts is so elaborate, you can barely understand it without a background of higher education and knowledge of other (feminist) manifestos. Almost every text we read would have needed to come with a translation into “normal” English. In my opinion the translation would be essential to one of the biggest goals of the manifestos: mobilise everyone to work for the imagined future and also an improved now.  Right now, most of the text are very elitist. I also don’t agree with the glorification of technology as the best and final solution for all current inequalities. I think that the offline and non-technological work between people is equally important for the transformation to a more just future. I want activism “away from our screens […], commit[ing] to making space for rigorous criticism, feedback, play, and pleasure as activism.” (Russel 2020).  But even though I have difficulties with some of the argumentation it is amazing to know that there are like-minded people in the world who want to make it a more just place. To end with my favourite quote from Legacy Russel (2020):  We refuse to shrink ourselves, refuse to fit. […]  We will take up space, and break this world, making new ones.

Thank you for reading,
Alice Tsega
